I biked down to Rockler today to get a set of scrapers. Then I procrastinated actually prepping the scraper edge for a very long time, in the meanwhile reading 20 or so pages of the ‘in progress’ thread at mandolincafe and other unproductive things.

This morning I was sketching out designs for the peghead and settled on one I like. It's a bit evocative of the curly F5 design, but much simpler. I actually came up with it tracing different lines around a roll of tape, so it's somewhat geometric and balanced. I cut it into an index card taped over the headstock, and sometime sooner or later I'll transfer it right onto the peghead front and back to make sure I like it, from there it's cutting time!

Reluctant to hone/burnish the edges of fancy new scrapers I experimented with a cheap handheld flat sander clamped upside down into a vice as a method for getting the unwanted chisel marks out of the backboard, it didn't make much difference. Finally I bit the bullet and hoped that the knife–sharpening tool from the kitchen was in fact hard enough steel to burnish the scraper and found myself a file, some kind of sharpening stone (not sure exactly what kind), some motor oil, a leather strop and the burnisher and went down and did it. The instructions for doing it make it sound a lot more complicated than it is. Basically all you're doing is cleaning up the edge, sharpening it a bit, and then applying pressure with the burnisher that bends a bit of metal on either edge of the scraper out into something like a little sharp mushroom, that can eat away at wood as you scrape.

I worked great not only at taking care of my overzealous carving, but also at knocking down a lot of the ridges that were in both the top– and backboard, giving them dare I say a nice smooth rounded look. On the downside my desk is full of sawdust and wood shavings (as is my throat) but I suppose that's a small price to pay for all this. Before busting out the scrapers I was a bit down on myself–hoping I hadn't burned out on this whole thing already—but now I'm nice and excited again.

I need to get the neck fitted into the dovetail. When I put it in it's about 1mm short of going all the way to the bottom of its slot, and I'm very wary of overcompensating and coming out with a wobbly neck joint. It's pretty important that it be right down the middle as well: the dowels that go in would probably stabilize it if it did happen to be a bit wobbly, but they'd be unlikely to do so in a balanced fashion. I also need to figure out the whole neck angle thing, hopefully the way the joint is cut it comes out at a good angle without me having to do much of anything.

—4/18/09

--

I got a copy of the plan from Siminoff that shows the cross section of the air chamber, with top and back graduations at different points. Glued those onto card stock and cut them out to have a reference for my archings, at which point I realized they were more or less useless because I'd but them out in one piece, so that I could fit them into the curvatures of top and back, but I realized that they're opposite, and not particularly useful. I'm going to try and figure out a caliper to check the thicknesses, but worst case it wouldn't be that hard to recut the templates I already have and get a good estimate.

I decided to try out a bowl–carving chisel I got from my mom on the back. Used it a bit on the inside with no adverse results, but it seemed like it'd take an inordinate amount of time to take wood out evenly from the whole inside with that. Unfortunately for whatever reason I then decided to pull some wood off the outside of the back with the chisel, and got a bit overzealous and now I have a few good gouges just below the glue joint towards where the tailpiece goes. It'll be work to sand these out, but that's what I get I suppose.

—4/17/09

--

Got my kit this tuesday, along with the Sminoff book. I skimmed through most of the Siminoff book that night, along with the paltry instruction packet that came in the kit. Next night I Read more throughly through Siminoff  and looked over the kit ‘instructions’—in quotes because I can hardly call them that.

Last night (thursday) I decided to dive in and got a rasp, some chisels, carving knives, and sanding blocks out, determined to go after shaping the neck. I figured I'd start on something relatively easy that's less noticeable (i.e. on the back vs. front and center.)

The rasp was a bad idea. The neck is already mostly shaped, but I wanted a different curve where it blends into the headstock. I got some wood off the neck, but very unevenly and also chipped the edge of the headstock veneer on the treble side, which looks kind of crappy but not agonizingly so. I moved down a notch in terms of tools and went for a coarse foam sanding block, which worked pretty well. As I was hacking away at it I got more and more of an idea as to what it should look like, and tried my best to keep it going that direction.

I eventually brought out a carving knife to keep a good definition between the headstock and the neck. I had to work extra hard because there were three very noticeable gashes on the treble side just above the ridge between neck and the back of the headstock, so I had to sand that for a while to bring the wood down to the level of the gashes and then blend them away. But all in all it turned out very much to my liking, if the rest of the project goes similarly I'll have a mandolin that ought to make me very happy.

After getting the top of the back of the neck shaped the way I wanted it, I moved down to the heel (terminology?), where it meets the body, still focusing my work on the back. The button or heel or whatever its called was evenly rounded, and I wanted it to come to a bit of a point. Again, the rasp was a bad idea, so I sanded until the scratches I'd rasped into the heel were gone and it looked like I wanted.

At this point I went onto the soundboard with my sanding block and worked at bringing it down a bit. I experimented a few times with chisels, but they never did much for me and I didn't want to gouge anything, so stayed with my—thus far at least—tried and true sanding block. I brought out a stiffer but thinner sanding block to work on this as well. There were some unsightly gashes around the edges, and more—this time almost distressing—about where the tailpiece would go. Sanded them mostly out, hopefully. Did a little ‘carving’–still with sandpaper, not to mention completely in the dark as to what the thicknesses should be. I measured the thickness where the f–holes are cut as best as I could, and it looked plenty thick, so I didn't worry about thinning them out too much. I want to find a gauge to make a cheap what's–it–called… a caliper? Part of me says to just go with the way the kit came graduated, but part of me says to make sure that it's graded the way Siminoff says. We'll see.

—4/16/09